At first we were equipped with the old Springfield rifle, but this was
soon replaced by the Krag-Jorgensen carbine. Each trooper was soon
fully equipped as follows: horse, McClellen saddle, saddle bags,
bridle, halter, and horse blanket, carbine, saber, Colt revolver,
belts, and ammunition, canteen, mess kits, sleeping blanket, shelter
half, and uniforms.

The ladies of Harrisburg and Hazleton were extremely generous to the
troop. From Harrisburg each soldier received a large and beautiful
yellow silk neckerchief, a Bible, and a large quantity of pipes and
tobacco. From Hazleton came literature and boxes after boxes of
edibles, which were greatly relished by the troopers.

Some time was consumed in the breaking of horses, getting them bridle
wise, and training them to the saddle, and this afforded great
amusement to the thousands of spectators who visited the reservation
daily. The troop, which consisted of one hundred privates and three
commissioned officers, was made up of men from various walks of life.
Lawyers, athletes, students, merchants, ex-regular-army soldiers,
cowboys, and Indians swapped stories around the camp-fires at night.
Every day, after the usual routine of duty had been performed, games
of all descriptions were indulged in, poker under the shade of an “A”
wall tent usually predominating. One of the entertaining features of
the camp was a quartette of singers, members of the “Sheridan” and
“Governor’s” troops, and ex-members of the University of Pennsylvania
Glee Club. These boys were always in demand.

“Broncho buster,” George S. Reed, an ex-Texas ranger, Nome gold miner,
and survivor of several duels, the most noted man of the “Governor’s
Troop,” had cast his fortunes with the soldier “lay out,” and had
boasted that there never was a broncho foaled that he could not cling
to. “Broncho’s” debut as an equestrian was to ride a horse we called
the “rat,” a bad one. Reed had great difficulty in getting his foot in
the stirrup, as this animal would bite, buck, and kick, and besides
held a few tricks in reserve. Finally, taking a desperate chance,
“Broncho” swung himself into the saddle and the show was on. The horse
plunged, bolted, and bucked, in trying to unseat the rider. When all
efforts seemed to have been exhausted, the “rat” bucked, and made a
complete somersault, rolling the ranger on the turf, then rising and
doing a contortion, wriggled through the saddle girth and blanket, and
bolted for the timber. “That horse is mad,” said Reed, brushing the
dust from his uniform. “Did you see it loop the loop?” The horse that
fell to “Broncho’s” lot was a gentle animal, that could tell by
instinct when the canteen was empty, and would stand without hitching
at any point where the goods could be supplied.

Each day brought forth news of the mobilization of troops and the
progress of the war. Mt. Gretna, an ideal place for a military
rendezvous, presented a grand spectacle. Regiments were rigidly
disciplined and drilled to the requirements of war, sham battles were
fought, galloping horsemen could be seen repulsing the enemy, while
the wild cheering of the infantry in the charge, and the reckless
maneuvering of artillery in establishing points of vantage for getting
into action, had the aspect of mimic war.

Days rolled by and the troops yearned for active service. The Tenth
Pennsylvania Infantry, having received orders to proceed to the
Philippine Islands, was the first regiment to break the monotony.
There was great activity in breaking camp, and a speedy departure
amidst a wild demonstration enthused the boys whose fate lay with the
fortunes of war, and whose valiant bravery along the south line, from
Bacoor to Manila, will ever remain vivid in the annals of the
insurrection.

The news of the departure of the “Rough Riders” for Cuba was heralded
with much joy as a forerunner of our getting to the front, also the
distribution of regiments to southern camps, where the sons of the
“Blue and the Gray” commingled and fraternized as comrades fighting
for the same cause, and spun yarns of the bloody strife of the
rebellion in which their fathers had opposed each other in a bitter
struggle.

The promulgation of the general order directing our departure for the
South was received with cheers. Breaking camp was immediately begun,
the loading of horses and equipment on the train being accomplished
with the dexterity of a troop of regulars. All along the route the
train met with an ovation. There was waving of flags and
handkerchiefs, bells were tolled, and the shrill whistles of factories
welcomed the boys on to the front. Arriving at Falls Church, Virginia,
we at once set to work unloading our horses and accoutrements of war,
which was accomplished with almost insuperable difficulty, due to our
having reached our destination at night and in a blinding rain-storm.

Among the members of our troop was a Swedish Count, and at this point
I recall a little incident which it will not be amiss to relate. We
had unloaded our horses and were awaiting orders, when the Count
approached me and said:

“Bill, ven do ve eat?”

“I guess we don’t eat, Count,” I replied; “these are the horrors of
war.”

“Vell, py tam,” said the Count, “dis vore vas all horrores. I vanted
to blay benuckle on der train und der corporal say: ‘You go mit der
baggage car, unt cook some beans,’ unt by tam, I couldn’t cook vater
yet.”

We remained at Falls Church over night, and in the morning marched to
Camp Alger through blinding torrents of rain and fetlock-deep in mud.
This camp, like most Southern camps, was very unhealthy, the heat was
stifling, and many soldiers succumbed to fever. Here the troops of
cavalry were consolidated into a squadron, consisting of Troop “A” of
New York, Troop “C” of Brooklyn, “City Troop” of Philadelphia,
“Sheridan Troop” of Tyrone, and “The Governor’s Troop” of Harrisburg,
under the command of Major Jones, formerly captain of the “Sheridan
Troop,” who relieved Captain Groome, of the “City Troop” of
Philadelphia, who had been temporarily in command.

Camp Alger was a city of tents, as far as the eye could discern in
every direction, there being about thirty thousand soldiers in the
camp. My first duty at this Post was a detail as “orderly,” at General
Graham’s headquarters. With a well-groomed horse, polished saddle, and
soldierly immaculateness, I reported for duty. Entering the General’s
spacious tent and saluting, I said:

“Sir, Trooper Adams, of the ‘Governor’s Troop,’ reports as orderly to
the Commanding General.”

“Very well,” replied the General; “give the Colonel of the Second
Tennessee my compliments and tell him I will review his regiment at
4.30 P.M.”

“Yes, sir, but, by the way, General,” said I, “where is the Second
Tennessee located?”

“Make an about face and follow your nose,” the old man replied, and I
did; but if the old General could have heard the mute invectives aimed
at him I probably never would have told this yarn. I do not blame him
now, as I realize how unmilitary I was. I had no difficulty in finding
the Colonel of the Second Tennessee, as I kept my nose right in front
of me.

The news of the victory of Santiago was celebrated by the troops in
gorgeous style. Regiment followed regiment in wild acclaim, cheers
after cheers resounded from the throats of the thirty thousand
soldiers who were anxiously awaiting their call to the front. Bonfires
of tar barrels were kept burning all night, and the excitement of the
camp was intense.

The cavalry was ordered to Newport News to await the arrival of the
transports; but, unlike the Sixth Massachusetts, that was stoned in
Baltimore at the outbreak of the rebellion, our greetings in the South
were exceptionally friendly. At Richmond bouquets of flowers were
scattered in profusion among the soldiers, and many a fair maiden left
the station with a pair of cross sabers pinned to her shirtwaist.

Our camp at Newport News was on sandy soil on the banks of the James
River, which afforded excellent bathing and fishing. Here the cavalry
received their khaki uniforms, which were the first issued to United
States troops and had the appearance of an officer’s regimentals. As a
consequence it was a common sight to see a “doughboy” saluting a
trooper as he strolled through the city. A member of a Kentucky
regiment was heard to remark: “That Pennsylvania cavalry is hot stuff;
they are all officers.”

A few days after pitching camp, something happened; it is an occasion
when a soldier possesses that air of complacency which invariably
pervades the atmosphere. It is when the “ghost walks” (pay day) that
the soldier is not only happy, but has a keen desire for making every
one with whom he comes in contact happy. As a dispenser of pleasure,
when he has “the necessary,” his speed brooks no competition, and all
others look like “pikers” compared with “the man behind the gun.”

In 1898 Barton’s Theatre and Concert Hall was a nightly scene of
revelry, by cavalry, artillery, and infantry, and from a spectator’s
point of view it was hard to decide which was of more interest, the
scenes in front or in rear of the footlights. Songs that reached a
soldier’s heart were sung by dashing “prima donnas from the
cottonfields of Dixie,” the soldiers joining in the chorus. After the
“ghost had walked” this particular concert hall fell into the hands of
the boys, among whom was found talent far surpassing anything behind
the footlights. The soubrettes of the ballet dance mingled with the
boys, and these scenes were equivalent to the “Can Can” of the famous
“Red Mill” of Paris, or a Creole “Bal Masque” during a New Orleans
“Mardi Gras.”

As the orchestra struck up the music to “For he is only a Soldier
Boy,” a dashing southern beauty, in military costume, would saunter to
the footlights, accompanied by a chorus of lesser lights, whose
evolutions, combined with their singing, were extremely pretty and
inspiring to the soldiers. This sketch brought forth deafening
applause, dying out only as a trooper announced that he would endeavor
to recite “The Midnight Ride of Paul Revere,” or perhaps “Tam
O’Shanter,” while another would volunteer to inflict us with “Casey at
the Bat” or “The Face upon the Bar-room Floor,” to the mournful
strains from the dirge of Imogen, a sure harbinger for the dispensers
of “sangaree” to get busy and take orders. Another song, and the dance
was on once more and continued until the “dog watch” of the night,
when the soldiers realized that at reveille every man must be in ranks
to answer to the call of his name or suffer the alternative, a berth
in the “brig.”

This was the bright side of war, and, as each soldier was intent on
getting to the front, it was the exception rather than the rule to
hear of a misdemeanor being committed, or even to hear of a man being
confined to the “guard house.”

Newport News was a gay place in ’98. Its people were very hospitable
and friendly with the troops. Old Point Comfort and the Forts of
Hampton Roads were but a short run by rail from the camp, and these
were favorite resorts of the soldiers. Great excitement prevailed when
the order for the Porto Rican expedition――“Pennsylvania Cavalry to the
front”――was received.

The transport _Manitoba_ had been fitted from an old cattle scow to a
serviceable troop-ship, and had just returned from conveying a
detachment of “Rough Riders” to Cuba. This vessel was spacious but
lacking in the accommodations of our present-day transports that ply
the Pacific. Considerable time was spent in getting our horses and
munitions of war on board. When the signal to cast loose and provide
was given we had on board three troops of cavalry, three batteries of
field artillery, one battalion of Kentucky infantry, and detachments
of engineer, hospital, and signal corps, seven hundred head of horses,
and three hundred head of mules, besides the cargo of munitions of
war.

Our time on board was occupied in preparing for a harder campaign than
materialized. Carbines and six-shooters were oiled, and sabers
burnished (the scabbards of these, being nickel-plated, required
merely a coating of oil to keep them from rust). Our boots were
greased, and the front and rear sights of our carbines were blackened.
The boys scalloped the rims of their campaign hats, and some were
tattooed by adepts in the art. Cards and reading were other pastimes
of the voyage.

The fifth day out the United States cruiser _Columbia_ and battleship
_Indiana_ were sighted; they had come to convoy the ship into the
harbor of Playa Del Ponce. Arriving in the harbor at night, we had the
misfortune to run on a sand-bar, where, being compelled to anchor with
a list of about forty degrees, the possibility of our landing at night
became rather vague. While making preparations for an attempt to land,
a heavy gale encompassed the bay, making our position perilous, and,
as this continued throughout the following day, it was with the utmost
difficulty that our horses and mules were landed, a number of them
being swung overboard and allowed to swim ashore.

Having finally reached the ground of the enemy, great precaution was
taken to avoid a surprise; the water was inspected to make sure that
it contained no poisonous substance and the orders in posting
sentinels were rigidly enforced――each sentry before being posted had
to be thoroughly familiar with his orders, being required to repeat
them verbatim, and was also admonished as to the importance of keeping
constantly on the alert. He was forewarned that to be found asleep on
post in the enemy’s country meant to be tried by court-martial and if
convicted to suffer the penalty of death.